resources/pages/about/index.md, before:

---
title: Gergely Nagy
---

![The Mouse behind the keyboard](/assets/asylum/images/algernon-mouse.png)

*A tiny mouse, a hacker.*

Wannabe bachelor of arts pretending to be a software engineer; ex-Debian developer;
GPL zealot; and a few other boring things. If you want to know more about me,
read my [blog][blog], follow me [on Mastodon][mastodon], or have a look at the
projects [I contribute to][github].

 [blog]: /blog/
 [mastodon]: https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/@algernon
 [github]: https://github.com/algernon

If you are a recruiter, I strongly recommend reading <a
href="/about/for-recruiters/">my list of conditions and preferences</a>, which I
prepared just to make your life easier.

<a href="mailto:asylum@gergo.csillger.hu"
   rel="me"
   class="button"
   title="Email">Email</a>
<a href="xmpp:algernon@chat.csillger.hu"
  rel="me"
  class="button"
  title="Jabber/XMPP">XMPP</a>
<a href="/blog/"
   rel="me"
   class="button"
   title="Blog">Blog</a>
<a href="https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/@algernon" class="button"
   rel="me"
   title="Mastodon">Mastodon</a>
<a href="https://git.madhouse-project.org/algernon"
   rel="me"
   class="button"
   title="Git">Git</a>
<a href="https://github.com/algernon"
   rel="me"
   class="button"
   title="GitHub">GitHub</a>

Commit message:

Replace Mastodon with Fediverse
Mastodon is the name of a particular software suite, the community itself is the
Fediverse. Use the latter to refer to it.

Fixes #11.

Signed-off-by: Gergely Nagy <me@gergo.csillger.hu>

resources/pages/about/index.md, after:

---
title: Gergely Nagy
---

![The Mouse behind the keyboard](/assets/asylum/images/algernon-mouse.png)

*A tiny mouse, a hacker.*

Wannabe bachelor of arts pretending to be a software engineer; ex-Debian
developer; GPL zealot; and a few other boring things. If you want to know more
about me, read my [blog][blog], follow me [on the fediverse][fediverse], or have
a look at the projects [I contribute to][github].

 [blog]: /blog/
 [fediverse]: https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/@algernon
 [github]: https://github.com/algernon

If you are a recruiter, I strongly recommend reading <a
href="/about/for-recruiters/">my list of conditions and preferences</a>, which I
prepared just to make your life easier.

<a href="mailto:asylum@gergo.csillger.hu"
   rel="me"
   class="button"
   title="Email">Email</a>
<a href="xmpp:algernon@chat.csillger.hu"
  rel="me"
  class="button"
  title="Jabber/XMPP">XMPP</a>
<a href="/blog/"
   rel="me"
   class="button"
   title="Blog">Blog</a>
<a href="https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/@algernon" class="button"
   rel="me"
   title="Fediverse">Fediverse</a>
<a href="https://git.madhouse-project.org/algernon"
   rel="me"
   class="button"
   title="Git">Git</a>
<a href="https://github.com/algernon"
   rel="me"
   class="button"
   title="GitHub">GitHub</a>
