---
title: "New clothes of Madness"
date: 2013-03-09 23:30
tags: [News]
---

I use [piwik][piwik] for web analyitics, and with a recent upgrade to
the latest version came [page overlays][piwik:page-overlays], an
amazing tool that reassured my belief that I was doing something
wrong. Even though I was more satisfied with the
[last redesign][asylum:more-madness] than with the design before it, I
wasn't entirely happy. Something was off, something was making my
nerves tingle, but up until recently, I couldn't put my finger on what
this would be. It turns out, it was something very, very simple! So
much so, that I should've thought of it when I came up with the
[previous design][asylum:more-madness].

You see, I'm not a usability expert by any means, but I do use quite a
lot of different tools, be them web-based applications or traditional,
native ones. While using these, I try to pick the ones that get in my
way the least, that serve me, instead of trying to goad me into using
them the way their author declared the <em>One True Way</em>. This
often means I get to discover parts of the application I had no
intention discovering. As it turns out, this is the same issue I had
with my own site: I got rid of the sidebar to have more space for
content, but moved useful things into a menu that is not conveniently
accessible.

What I've seen from the analytics is that my visitors tend to feel the
same: the top menu was hardly ever used, some links there received no
clicks at all in the past three months. On the other hand, links that
were not hidden behind dropdowns were visited much more
often. <em>"What then, can I do better?"</em> - I asked myself.

Fortunately, the answer is pretty clear, and short!

 [piwik]: http://piwik.org/
 [piwik:page-overlays]: http://piwik.org/docs/page-overlay/
 [asylum:more-madness]: /blog/2013/01/27/some-more-madness/

<!-- more -->

<p class="inline" style="text-align: center">
 <a href="/assets/asylum/images/posts/some-more-madness/asylum-front-page.v4.png"
    data-toggle="lightbox" data-target="#lb-v4">
  <img class="img-polaroid inline rel-tooltip" width="342" height="192"
   alt="The (old) Asylum v4 design" title="The (old) Asylum v4 design"
   data-placement="left"
   src="/assets/asylum/images/posts/some-more-madness/asylum-front-page.v4.thumb.png">
 </a>
 <a href="/assets/asylum/images/posts/straight-jacket/asylum-front-page.v5.png"
    data-toggle="lightbox" data-target="#lb-v5">
  <img class="img-polaroid inline rel-tooltip" width="342" height="192"
   alt="The (new) Asylum v5 design" title="The (new) Asylum v5 design"
   data-placement="right"
   src="/assets/asylum/images/posts/straight-jacket/asylum-front-page.v5.thumb.png">
 </a>
</p>

The difference is, I believe, clearly visible: since hardly anyone
used the top menu, it's gone, and is replaced by three buttons
instead, so it is still easy to get back to the landing page or the
archive, and to subscribe. Another thing I learned from analytics is
that the recent posts were rarely visited too, and even if someone did
look further, they hardly spent enough time on the landing page to
read more than their title. Therefore, that section is gone too.

Instead of a menu at the top, and recent posts, tags and a number of
other links hidden behind dropdowns, there's a link-full area at the
bottom, with most of the contents of the former top menu, with a
higher number of recent post titles, conveniently placed below the
main content. It does take much more space than the sidebar did, but
it is positioned so that it doesn't take space away from the content
itself. Furthermore, having the links right there, without the need to
navigate a menu, makes it easier to reach other parts of the site,
makes some of the contents that were previously not immediately
reachable, visible.

With a bit of luck, this layout will have the desired effect of
visitors spending more time exploring the site. But even if they
don't, I still like this newest design better! It also has the added
side-effect of being even more mobile friendly: previously, parts of
the menu were expandable on mobile screens, now they're not shown at
all, because no mobile user expanded them, ever.

<div id="lb-v4" class="lightbox hide fade" tabindex="-1" role="dialog" aria-hidden="true">
    <div class='lightbox-header'>
        <button type="button" class="close" data-dismiss="lightbox" aria-hidden="true">&times;</button>
    </div>
    <div class='lightbox-content'>
        <img src="/assets/asylum/images/posts/some-more-madness/asylum-front-page.v4.png"
             alt="The (old) Asylum v4 design">
    </div>
</div>

<div id="lb-v5" class="lightbox hide fade" tabindex="-1" role="dialog" aria-hidden="true">
    <div class='lightbox-header'>
        <button type="button" class="close" data-dismiss="lightbox" aria-hidden="true">&times;</button>
    </div>
    <div class='lightbox-content'>
        <img src="/assets/asylum/images/posts/straight-jacket/asylum-front-page.v5.png"
             alt="The (new) Asylum v5 design">
    </div>
</div>
