resources/posts/2015-11-20-looking-for-a-keyboard.markdown, before:

---
title: "Looking for a keyboard"
date: 2015-11-20 18:45
tags: [Hacking, .planet.debian]
---

Even though I spend more time staring at the screen than typing, there are times
when I - after lots and lots of prior brain work - sit down and start typing, a
lot. A couple of years ago, I started to feel pain in my wrists, and there were
multiple occasions when I had to completely stop writing for longer periods of
time. These were situations I obviously did not want repeated, so I started to
look for remedies. First, I bought a new keyboard, a
[TypeMatrix 2300][typematrix], which while not ergonomic, was a huge relief for
my hands and wrists. I also started to learn Dvorak, but that's still something
that is kind-of in progress: my left hand can write Dvorak reasonably fast, but
my right one seems to be Qwerty-wired, even after a month of typing Dvorak
almost exclusively.

 [typematrix]: http://typematrix.com/2030/features.php 

This keyboard served me well for the past five year or so. But recently, I
started to look for a replacement, partly triggered by a
[Clojure/conj talk][clojure:typed] I watched. I got as far as assembling a list
of keyboards I'm interested in, but I have a hard time choosing. This blog post
here serves two purposes then: first to make a clear pros/cons list for myself,
second, to solicit feedback from others who may have more experience with any of
the options below.

 [clojure:typed]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uk3A41U0iO4

<!-- more -->

Lets start with the current keyboard!

<a name="typematrix"></a>
[TypeMatrix 2030](http://typematrix.com/)
------------

![TypeMatrix 2030][img:typematrix]

[img:typematrix]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/typematrix-2030.jpg "TypeMatrix 2030"

### Pros

* The Matrix architecture, with straight vertical key columns has been
  incredibly convenient.
* `Enter` and `Backspace` in the middle, both large: loving it.
* Skinnable (easier to clean, and aids in learning a new layout).
* Optional dvorak skin, and a hardware Dvorak switch.
* The layout (cursor keys, home/end, page up/down, etc) is something I got used
  to very fast.
* Multimedia keys close by with `Fn`.
* Small, portable, lightweight - ideal for travel.

### Cons

* Small: while also a feature, this is a downside too. Shoulder position is not
  ideal.
* Skins: while they are a terrific aid when learning a new layout, and make
  cleaning a lot easier, they wear off quickly. Sometimes fingernails are left
  to grow too long, and that doesn't do good to the skin. One of my two QWERTY
  layouts has a few holes already, sadly.
* Not a split keyboard, which is starting to feel undesirable.

### Summary

All in all, this is a keyboard I absolutely love, and am very happy with. Yet, I
feel I'm ready to try something different. With my skins aging, and the
aforementioned [Clojure/conj][clojure:typed] talk, the desire to switch has been
growing for a while now.

 [clojure:typed]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uk3A41U0iO4

Desired properties
--------------

There are a few desired properties of the keyboard I want next. The perfect
keyboard need not have all of these, but the more the merrier.

* Ergonomic design.
* Available in Dvorak, or with blank keys.
* Preferably a split keyboard, so I can position the two parts as I see fit.
* Ships to Hungary, or Germany, in a reasonable time frame. (If all else fails,
  shipping to the US may work too, but I'd rather avoid going through extra
  hoops.)
* Mechanical keys preferred. But not the loud clicky type: I work in an office;
  and at home, I don't want to wake my wife either.

I plan to buy one keyboard for a start, but may end up buying another to bring
to work (like I did with the TypeMatrix, except my employer at the time bought
the second one for me). At work, I will continue using the TypeMatrix, most
likely, but I'm not sure yet.

Anyhow, there are a number of things I do with my computer that require a keyboard:

* I write code, a considerable amount.
* I write prose, even more than code. Usually in English, sometimes in
  Hungarian.
* I play games. Most of them, with a dedicated controller, but there are some
  where I use the keyboard a lot.
* I browse the web, listen to music, and occasionally edit videos.
* I multi-task all the time.
* 90% of my time is spent within Emacs (recently switched to Spacemacs).
* I hate the mouse, with a passion. Trackballs, trackpoints and touchpads even
  more. If I can use my keyboard to do mouse-y stuff well enough to control the
  browser, and do some other things that do not require precise movement (that
  is, not games), I'll be very happy.

I am looking for a keyboard that helps me do these things. A keyboard that will
stay with me not for five years or a decade, but pretty much forever.

The options
==============

<a name="uhk"></a>
[Ultimate Hacking Keyboard](http://ultimatehackingkeyboard.com)
--------------------------------

![Ultimate Hacking Keyboard][img:uhk]

[img:uhk]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/uhk.jpg "Ultimate Hacking Keyboard"

### Pros

* Split keyboard.
* Mechanical keys (with a quiet option).
* Ships to Hungary. Made in Hungary!
* Optional addons: three extra buttons and a small trackball for the left side,
  and a trackball for the right side. While I'm not a big fan of the mouse, the
  primary reasons is that I have to move my hand. If it's in the middle, that
  sounds much better.
* Four layers of the factory keymap: I love the idea of these layers, especially
  the mouse layer.
* Programmable, so I can define any layout I want.
* Open source firmware, design and agent!
* An optional palm rest is available as well.
* Blank option available.

### Cons

* Likely not available before late summer, 2016.
* No thumb keys.
* Space/Mod arrangement feels alien.
* The LED area is useless to me, and bothers my eye. Not a big deal, but still.
* While thumb keys are available for the left side, not so for the right one.
  I'd rather have keys there than a trackball. The only reason I'd want the $50
  addon set, is the left thumb-key module (which also seems to have a
  trackpoint, another pointless gadget).

### Summary

The keyboard looks nice, has a lot of appealing features. It is programmable, so
much so that by the looks of it, I could emulate the hardware dvorak switch my
TypeMatrix has. However, I'm very unhappy with the addons, so there's that too.

All in all, this would cost me about **$304** (base keyboard, modules, palm rest
and shipping). Not too bad, certainly a strong contender, despite the
shortcomings.

<a name="ergodox"></a>
[ErgoDox](http://ergodox.org)
-------

![ErgoDox][img:ergodox]

[img:ergodox]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/ergodox.jpg "ErgoDox"

### Pros

* Great design, by the looks of it.
* Mechanical keys.
* Open source hardware and firmware, thus programmable.
* Thumb keys.
* Available via ErgoDox EZ as an assembled product.

### Cons

* Primarily a kit, but assembled available.
* Not sure when it'd ship (december shipments are sold out).

### Summary

The keyboard looks interesting, primarily due to the thumb keys. From the
ErgoDox EZ campaign, I'm looking at **$270**. That's friendly, and makes ErgoDox
a viable option! (Thanks [@miffe](https://twitter.com/miffe)!)

<a name="kinesis-advantage"></a>
[Kinesis Advantage](http://www.kinesis-ergo.com/shop/advantage-for-pc-mac/)
-----------------------

![Kinesis Advantage][img:kinesis-advantage]

[img:kinesis-advantage]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/kinesis-advantage.jpg "Kinesis Advantage"

### Pros

* Mechanical keys, Cherry-MX brown.
* Separate thumb keys.
* Key wells look interesting.
* Available right now.
* QWERTY/Dvorak layout available.

### Cons

* Not a split keyboard.
* Not open source, neither hardware, nor firmware.
* Shipping to Hungary may be problematic.
* The QWERTY/Dvorak layout is considerably more expensive.
* Judging by some of the videos I saw, keys are too loud.

### Summary

The key wells look interesting, but it's not a split keyboard, nor is it open
source. The cost come out about **$325** plus shipping and VAT and so on, so I'm
probably looking at something closer to **$400**. Nah. I'm pretty sure I can
rule this out.

<a name="kinesis-freestyle2"></a>
[Kinesis FreeStyle2](http://www.kinesis-ergo.com/shop/freestyle2-for-pc-us/)
-------------------------

![Kinesis FreeStyle2][img:kinesis-freestyle2]

[img:kinesis-freestyle2]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/kinesis-freestyle2.jpg "Kinesis FreeStyle2"

### Pros

* Split keyboard.
* Available right now.
* Optional accessory, to adjust the slope of the keyboard.

### Cons

* Not open source, neither hardware, nor firmware.
* Doesn't seem to be mechanical.
* Shipping to Hungary may be problematic.
* No Dvorak layout.
* No thumb keys.

### Summary

While a split keyboard, at a reasonably low cost (**$149** + shipping + VAT), it
lacks too many things to be considered a worthy contender.

<a name="maltron"></a>
[Maltron](http://www.maltron.com/shop/product/4606-maltron-two-hand-3d-fully-ergonomic-keyboards-for-hungary-us-english)
-----------

![Maltron][img:maltron]

[img:maltron]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/maltron.jpg "Maltron"

### Pros

* Mechanical keyboard.
* Key wells.
* Thumb keys.
* Built in palm rest.
* Available in Dvorak too.

### Cons

* Not a split keyboard.
* The center numeric area looks weird.
* Not sure about programmability.
* Not open source.
* Expensive.

### Summary

Without shipping, I'm looking at **£450**. That's a very steep price. I love the
wells, and the thumb keys, but it's not split, and customisability is a big
question here.

<a name="atreus"></a>
[Atreus](http://atreus.technomancy.us/)
-------

![Atreus][img:atreus]

[img:atreus]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/atreus.jpg "Atreus"

### Pros

* Sleek, compact design.
* No keycaps.
* Mechanical keyboard.
* Open source firmware.
* More keys within thumbs reach.
* Available right now.

### Cons

* Ships as a DIY kit.
* Not a split keyboard.

### Summary

While not a split keyboard, it does look very interesting, and the price is much
lower than the rest: **$149** + shipping (**$50** or so). It is similar - in
spirit - to my existing TypeMatrix. It wouldn't take much to get used to, and is
half the price of the alternatives. A strong option, for sure.

<a name="m01"></a>
[Keyboardio M01](http://shop.keyboard.io/)
-------------

![Keyboardio Model 01][img:m01]

[img:m01]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/m01.jpg "Keyboardio Model 01"

### Pros

* Mechanical keyboard.
* Hardwood body.
* Blank and dot-only keycaps option.
* Open source: firmware, hardware, and so on. Comes with a screwdriver.
* The physical key layout has much in common with my TypeMatrix.
* Numerous thumb-accessible keys.
* A palm key, that allows me to use the keyboard as a mouse.
* Fully programmable LEDs.
* Custom macros, per-application even.

### Cons

* Fairly expensive.
* Custom keycap design, thus rearranging them physically is not an option, which
  leaves me with the blank or dot-only keycap options only.
* Available late summer, 2016.

### Summary

With shipping cost and whatnot, I'm looking at something in the **$370**
ballpark, which is on the more expensive side. On the other hand, I get a whole
lot of bang for my buck: LEDs, two center bars (tripod mounting sounds really
awesome!), hardwood body, and a key layout that is very similar to what I came
to love on the TypeMatrix.

I also have a thing for wooden stuff. I like the look of it, the feel of it.

The Preference List
========================

After writing this all up, I think I prefer the [Model 01](#m01), but the
[UHK](#uhk) and [ErgoDox](#ergodox) come close too!

The UHK is cheaper, but not by a large margin. It lacks the thumb keys and the
palm key the M01 has. It also looks rather dull (sorry). They'd both ship about
the same time, but, the M01 is already funded, while the UHK is not (mind you,
there's a pretty darn high chance it will be).

The [ErgoDox](#ergodox) has thumb keys, split keyboard, and is open source.
Compared to the UHK, we have the thumb keys, and less distraction, for a better
price. But the case is not so nice. Compared to the Model 01: no leds, or center
bar, and an inferior case. But, much better price, which is an important factor
too.

Then, there's the [Atreus](#atreus). While it's a DIY kit, it is much more
affordable than the rest, and I could have it far sooner. Yet... it doesn't feel
like a big enough switch from my current keyboard. I might as well continue
using the TypeMatrix then, right?

The rest, I ruled out earlier, while I was reviewing them anyway.

So, the big question is: should I invest close to **$400** into a keyboard that
looks stunning, and will likely grow old with me? Or should I give up some of
the features, and settle for one of the **$300** ones, that'll also grow old
with me. Or is there an option I did not consider, that may match my needs and
preferences better?

If you, my dear reader, got this far, and have a suggestion, please either
[tweet at me](https://twitter.com/algernoone), or write an
[email](mailto:keyboard@gergo.csillger.hu), or reach me over any other medium
[I am reachable at](/about/) (including IRC, hanging out as algernon on FreeNode
and OFTC).

Thank you in advance, to all of you who contact me, and help me choose a
keyboard!

Commit message:

Update the "Looking for a keyboard" post a little
Link to the followup post.

Signed-off-by: Gergely Nagy <algernon@cloudera.com>

resources/posts/2015-11-20-looking-for-a-keyboard.markdown, after:

---
title: "Looking for a keyboard"
date: 2015-11-20 18:45
tags: [Hacking, .planet.debian]
---

Even though I spend more time staring at the screen than typing, there are times
when I - after lots and lots of prior brain work - sit down and start typing, a
lot. A couple of years ago, I started to feel pain in my wrists, and there were
multiple occasions when I had to completely stop writing for longer periods of
time. These were situations I obviously did not want repeated, so I started to
look for remedies. First, I bought a new keyboard, a
[TypeMatrix 2300][typematrix], which while not ergonomic, was a huge relief for
my hands and wrists. I also started to learn Dvorak, but that's still something
that is kind-of in progress: my left hand can write Dvorak reasonably fast, but
my right one seems to be Qwerty-wired, even after a month of typing Dvorak
almost exclusively.

 [typematrix]: http://typematrix.com/2030/features.php 

This keyboard served me well for the past five year or so. But recently, I
started to look for a replacement, partly triggered by a
[Clojure/conj talk][clojure:typed] I watched. I got as far as assembling a list
of keyboards I'm interested in, but I have a hard time choosing. This blog post
here serves two purposes then: first to make a clear pros/cons list for myself,
second, to solicit feedback from others who may have more experience with any of
the options below.

 [clojure:typed]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uk3A41U0iO4

**Update**: There is a [follow up post], with a few more keyboards explored, and
  a semi-final verdict. Thanks everyone for the feedback and help, much
  appreciated!

<!-- more -->

Lets start with the current keyboard!

<a name="typematrix"></a>
[TypeMatrix 2030](http://typematrix.com/)
------------

![TypeMatrix 2030][img:typematrix]

[img:typematrix]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/typematrix-2030.jpg "TypeMatrix 2030"

### Pros

* The Matrix architecture, with straight vertical key columns has been
  incredibly convenient.
* `Enter` and `Backspace` in the middle, both large: loving it.
* Skinnable (easier to clean, and aids in learning a new layout).
* Optional dvorak skin, and a hardware Dvorak switch.
* The layout (cursor keys, home/end, page up/down, etc) is something I got used
  to very fast.
* Multimedia keys close by with `Fn`.
* Small, portable, lightweight - ideal for travel.

### Cons

* Small: while also a feature, this is a downside too. Shoulder position is not
  ideal.
* Skins: while they are a terrific aid when learning a new layout, and make
  cleaning a lot easier, they wear off quickly. Sometimes fingernails are left
  to grow too long, and that doesn't do good to the skin. One of my two QWERTY
  layouts has a few holes already, sadly.
* Not a split keyboard, which is starting to feel undesirable.

### Summary

All in all, this is a keyboard I absolutely love, and am very happy with. Yet, I
feel I'm ready to try something different. With my skins aging, and the
aforementioned [Clojure/conj][clojure:typed] talk, the desire to switch has been
growing for a while now.

 [clojure:typed]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uk3A41U0iO4

Desired properties
--------------

There are a few desired properties of the keyboard I want next. The perfect
keyboard need not have all of these, but the more the merrier.

* Ergonomic design.
* Available in Dvorak, or with blank keys.
* Preferably a split keyboard, so I can position the two parts as I see fit.
* Ships to Hungary, or Germany, in a reasonable time frame. (If all else fails,
  shipping to the US may work too, but I'd rather avoid going through extra
  hoops.)
* Mechanical keys preferred. But not the loud clicky type: I work in an office;
  and at home, I don't want to wake my wife either.

I plan to buy one keyboard for a start, but may end up buying another to bring
to work (like I did with the TypeMatrix, except my employer at the time bought
the second one for me). At work, I will continue using the TypeMatrix, most
likely, but I'm not sure yet.

Anyhow, there are a number of things I do with my computer that require a keyboard:

* I write code, a considerable amount.
* I write prose, even more than code. Usually in English, sometimes in
  Hungarian.
* I play games. Most of them, with a dedicated controller, but there are some
  where I use the keyboard a lot.
* I browse the web, listen to music, and occasionally edit videos.
* I multi-task all the time.
* 90% of my time is spent within Emacs (recently switched to Spacemacs).
* I hate the mouse, with a passion. Trackballs, trackpoints and touchpads even
  more. If I can use my keyboard to do mouse-y stuff well enough to control the
  browser, and do some other things that do not require precise movement (that
  is, not games), I'll be very happy.

I am looking for a keyboard that helps me do these things. A keyboard that will
stay with me not for five years or a decade, but pretty much forever.

The options
==============

<a name="uhk"></a>
[Ultimate Hacking Keyboard](http://ultimatehackingkeyboard.com)
--------------------------------

![Ultimate Hacking Keyboard][img:uhk]

[img:uhk]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/uhk.jpg "Ultimate Hacking Keyboard"

### Pros

* Split keyboard.
* Mechanical keys (with a quiet option).
* Ships to Hungary. Made in Hungary!
* Optional addons: three extra buttons and a small trackball for the left side,
  and a trackball for the right side. While I'm not a big fan of the mouse, the
  primary reasons is that I have to move my hand. If it's in the middle, that
  sounds much better.
* Four layers of the factory keymap: I love the idea of these layers, especially
  the mouse layer.
* Programmable, so I can define any layout I want.
* Open source firmware, design and agent!
* An optional palm rest is available as well.
* Blank option available.

### Cons

* Likely not available before late summer, 2016.
* No thumb keys.
* Space/Mod arrangement feels alien.
* The LED area is useless to me, and bothers my eye. Not a big deal, but still.
* While thumb keys are available for the left side, not so for the right one.
  I'd rather have keys there than a trackball. The only reason I'd want the $50
  addon set, is the left thumb-key module (which also seems to have a
  trackpoint, another pointless gadget).

### Summary

The keyboard looks nice, has a lot of appealing features. It is programmable, so
much so that by the looks of it, I could emulate the hardware dvorak switch my
TypeMatrix has. However, I'm very unhappy with the addons, so there's that too.

All in all, this would cost me about **$304** (base keyboard, modules, palm rest
and shipping). Not too bad, certainly a strong contender, despite the
shortcomings.

<a name="ergodox"></a>
[ErgoDox](http://ergodox.org)
-------

![ErgoDox][img:ergodox]

[img:ergodox]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/ergodox.jpg "ErgoDox"

### Pros

* Great design, by the looks of it.
* Mechanical keys.
* Open source hardware and firmware, thus programmable.
* Thumb keys.
* Available via ErgoDox EZ as an assembled product.

### Cons

* Primarily a kit, but assembled available.
* Not sure when it'd ship (december shipments are sold out).

### Summary

The keyboard looks interesting, primarily due to the thumb keys. From the
ErgoDox EZ campaign, I'm looking at **$270**. That's friendly, and makes ErgoDox
a viable option! (Thanks [@miffe](https://twitter.com/miffe)!)

<a name="kinesis-advantage"></a>
[Kinesis Advantage](http://www.kinesis-ergo.com/shop/advantage-for-pc-mac/)
-----------------------

![Kinesis Advantage][img:kinesis-advantage]

[img:kinesis-advantage]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/kinesis-advantage.jpg "Kinesis Advantage"

### Pros

* Mechanical keys, Cherry-MX brown.
* Separate thumb keys.
* Key wells look interesting.
* Available right now.
* QWERTY/Dvorak layout available.

### Cons

* Not a split keyboard.
* Not open source, neither hardware, nor firmware.
* Shipping to Hungary may be problematic.
* The QWERTY/Dvorak layout is considerably more expensive.
* Judging by some of the videos I saw, keys are too loud.

### Summary

The key wells look interesting, but it's not a split keyboard, nor is it open
source. The cost come out about **$325** plus shipping and VAT and so on, so I'm
probably looking at something closer to **$400**. Nah. I'm pretty sure I can
rule this out.

<a name="kinesis-freestyle2"></a>
[Kinesis FreeStyle2](http://www.kinesis-ergo.com/shop/freestyle2-for-pc-us/)
-------------------------

![Kinesis FreeStyle2][img:kinesis-freestyle2]

[img:kinesis-freestyle2]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/kinesis-freestyle2.jpg "Kinesis FreeStyle2"

### Pros

* Split keyboard.
* Available right now.
* Optional accessory, to adjust the slope of the keyboard.

### Cons

* Not open source, neither hardware, nor firmware.
* Doesn't seem to be mechanical.
* Shipping to Hungary may be problematic.
* No Dvorak layout.
* No thumb keys.

### Summary

While a split keyboard, at a reasonably low cost (**$149** + shipping + VAT), it
lacks too many things to be considered a worthy contender.

<a name="maltron"></a>
[Maltron](http://www.maltron.com/shop/product/4606-maltron-two-hand-3d-fully-ergonomic-keyboards-for-hungary-us-english)
-----------

![Maltron][img:maltron]

[img:maltron]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/maltron.jpg "Maltron"

### Pros

* Mechanical keyboard.
* Key wells.
* Thumb keys.
* Built in palm rest.
* Available in Dvorak too.

### Cons

* Not a split keyboard.
* The center numeric area looks weird.
* Not sure about programmability.
* Not open source.
* Expensive.

### Summary

Without shipping, I'm looking at **£450**. That's a very steep price. I love the
wells, and the thumb keys, but it's not split, and customisability is a big
question here.

<a name="atreus"></a>
[Atreus](http://atreus.technomancy.us/)
-------

![Atreus][img:atreus]

[img:atreus]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/atreus.jpg "Atreus"

### Pros

* Sleek, compact design.
* No keycaps.
* Mechanical keyboard.
* Open source firmware.
* More keys within thumbs reach.
* Available right now.

### Cons

* Ships as a DIY kit.
* Not a split keyboard.

### Summary

While not a split keyboard, it does look very interesting, and the price is much
lower than the rest: **$149** + shipping (**$50** or so). It is similar - in
spirit - to my existing TypeMatrix. It wouldn't take much to get used to, and is
half the price of the alternatives. A strong option, for sure.

<a name="m01"></a>
[Keyboardio M01](http://shop.keyboard.io/)
-------------

![Keyboardio Model 01][img:m01]

[img:m01]: /assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/m01.jpg "Keyboardio Model 01"

### Pros

* Mechanical keyboard.
* Hardwood body.
* Blank and dot-only keycaps option.
* Open source: firmware, hardware, and so on. Comes with a screwdriver.
* The physical key layout has much in common with my TypeMatrix.
* Numerous thumb-accessible keys.
* A palm key, that allows me to use the keyboard as a mouse.
* Fully programmable LEDs.
* Custom macros, per-application even.

### Cons

* Fairly expensive.
* Custom keycap design, thus rearranging them physically is not an option, which
  leaves me with the blank or dot-only keycap options only.
* Available late summer, 2016.

### Summary

With shipping cost and whatnot, I'm looking at something in the **$370**
ballpark, which is on the more expensive side. On the other hand, I get a whole
lot of bang for my buck: LEDs, two center bars (tripod mounting sounds really
awesome!), hardwood body, and a key layout that is very similar to what I came
to love on the TypeMatrix.

I also have a thing for wooden stuff. I like the look of it, the feel of it.

The Preference List
========================

After writing this all up, I think I prefer the [Model 01](#m01), but the
[UHK](#uhk) and [ErgoDox](#ergodox) come close too!

The UHK is cheaper, but not by a large margin. It lacks the thumb keys and the
palm key the M01 has. It also looks rather dull (sorry). They'd both ship about
the same time, but, the M01 is already funded, while the UHK is not (mind you,
there's a pretty darn high chance it will be).

The [ErgoDox](#ergodox) has thumb keys, split keyboard, and is open source.
Compared to the UHK, we have the thumb keys, and less distraction, for a better
price. But the case is not so nice. Compared to the Model 01: no leds, or center
bar, and an inferior case. But, much better price, which is an important factor
too.

Then, there's the [Atreus](#atreus). While it's a DIY kit, it is much more
affordable than the rest, and I could have it far sooner. Yet... it doesn't feel
like a big enough switch from my current keyboard. I might as well continue
using the TypeMatrix then, right?

The rest, I ruled out earlier, while I was reviewing them anyway.

So, the big question is: should I invest close to **$400** into a keyboard that
looks stunning, and will likely grow old with me? Or should I give up some of
the features, and settle for one of the **$300** ones, that'll also grow old
with me. Or is there an option I did not consider, that may match my needs and
preferences better?

If you, my dear reader, got this far, and have a suggestion, please either
[tweet at me](https://twitter.com/algernoone), or write an
[email](mailto:keyboard@gergo.csillger.hu), or reach me over any other medium
[I am reachable at](/about/) (including IRC, hanging out as algernon on FreeNode
and OFTC).

Thank you in advance, to all of you who contact me, and help me choose a
keyboard!
