---
title: "ErgoDox: Day 22"
date: 2016-05-14 15:00
tags: [Hacking, Keyboard, ErgoDox, Video, Ergonomics]
---

I am now using the ErgoDox EZ as my main keyboard at work, and am
loving it. Sometimes, when really frustrated, I still switch back to
my TypeMatrix, but that is happening less and less. As of day 22, I am
consistenlty reaching 40+ WPM, with 95%+ accuracy. But I make a lot of
mistakes, so it is time I slowed down, and work on accuracy for a
while instead.

 [ergodox-6]: /blog/2016/04/29/ergodox-day-6/

I also started to record my typing sessions, the short bursts of
practice I do on [keyhero.com](https://www.keyhero.com), to later
analyze them, and compare them to other videos of people typing on the
ErgoDox. Below, you will find a short guide for my layout, wherein I
try to explain why it works like it does, and how I ended up setting
it up so. (This also includes a video of me typing, likely badly.)

Since the [last time][ergodox-6], the layout changed considerably:

 [![Layout](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-22/base-layer.png)](http://www.keyboard-layout-editor.com/#/gists/28f7eb305fdbff943613e1dc7aa9e82b)

The repository has also moved, instead of a fork of the QMK firmware,
I now maintain my layout [separately][layout-repo]. This makes it
easier to batch up changes, and squash them, once I am ready to submit
the layout. I want to preserve my own history too, but don't want to
include all the noise in the PR.

 [layout-repo]: https://github.com/algernon/ergodox-layout

<!-- more -->

As one can see at a glance, this is not your ordinary QWERTY layout,
and - as far as modifiers are concerned - is very different than my
previous layout. There are no modifiers on the sides, my pinky didn't
like hitting them at all! It was very, very inconvenient. On my former
keyboard, the buttons are closer together, so reaching the sides with
the pinky is easier. On the ErgoDox, not so much. So I moved the
modifiers to a place where I can reach them easily, to a finger that
is far stronger than my pinky: to the thumb cluster. Having all the
modifiers and layer switches there has been very comfortable so far.

Last time, I started an experiment, making the `Shift` key sticky, and
this turned out to be amazingly comfortable: I no longer need to
remember to hold it, and release it at the right time, I just tap it
again. I loved this so much, that I turned `Alt` and `Control` sticky
too. And since they are sticky, I really want to see some indication
whether they're active or not, so the LEDs were repurposed: instead of
showing the layer, they now show modifiers. Of course, I still would
like to see layer indicators too - thankfully, by pure luck, while
trying to figure out how to make the LEDs blink, I discovered that one
can set their brightness. So layers are indicated by two dim LEDs, and
modifiers by one bright one.

The `ESC` key was also moved to the thumb cluster, because I use it
fairly often, and the `Apps` (or `Menu`) button sees far less use, so
that one was banished to the inner-top corner of each side of the
keyboard.

There's the dedicated `bracket` and `parens` keys, but I will likely
change those: the parens will move up, and trigger on long-press, and
`:` and `'' will take their former place, most likely. Reason is, I
work a lot with Python nowadays, and these two are a bit awkward to
reach on the normal Dvorak layout.

I'm considering adding a dedicated [Programmer Dvorak][prg-dvorak]
layer too, but that may take a while.

 [prg-dvorak]: http://www.kaufmann.no/roland/dvorak/

Besides of these symbols, the one thing I am not happy with are the
bottom rows. I can't get used to it. I am training myself to use the
*navigation* layer when I need to move the cursors, but then, I'll
need to find a good use for the row... But this is a topic for another
time!

## Navigation layer

[![Navigation layer](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-22/nav-layer.png)](http://www.keyboard-layout-editor.com/#/gists/e4556d8dc59736c26d51a58cb4c4d2f0)

For all mouse-y, navigational and media needs!

The coloring here follows the following pattern: blue are mouse keys,
red is cursor navigation, light orange is media control, pink are
copy/paste related functions, and the rest are as usual.

The copy/paste stuff needs some explanation: there are three modes of operation:
`Emacs`, `Terminal`, and `Other`. The keys work the following way:

* The topmost pink button turns on `visual-mode` in the `Emacs` mode, by sending
  a `v`. In all other modes, it does nothing.
* The second one is the *copy* and *cut* key. Tapped, it copies, held longer, it
  cuts. In `Emacs` mode, this sends `y` or `x`, respectively. In `Terminal`
  mode, it sends `C-S-c` or `C-S-x`. In `Other` mode, `C-c` or `C-x`.
* The third one, on the thumb cluster is the *paste* and *delete* button in one.
  Tapped, it pastes, held longer, it deletes. In `Emacs` mode, this sends `p`
  (or `]p` if `Shift` is also down) or `d`, respectively. In `Terminal` mode, it
  sends `C-S-v` or `DEL`. In `Other` mode, `C-v` or `DEL`.

Tapping the key that enabled this layer will bring us further, to the
`Edit layer`, which adds a few keys to aid in returning to
editing. This layer may end up being folded back to the navigation
layer, though.

## The other layers

There are a few other layers: one for Hungarian symbols, one for all
kinds of symbols, and a third, that activates for one keypress only,
after tapping the `GUI` key (which sends `Gui+w` to the computer,
popping up an application selector). This layer has shortcuts for
switching to any of the five most used apps, and it deactivates after
any key on the keyboard is tapped.

The Hungarian and Symbol layers I do not use much, and the latter is
likely to be replaced by a Programmer Dvorak layer, or just deleted,
if I end up turning the base layer into programmer Dvorak.

## Typing test

As promised in the beginning, below you can see a video of me typing
some shortish text on [keyhero](https://www.keyhero.com/). I believe I
did 40-42WPM here, but I still need to set things up so that both my
screen, and my keyboard gets recorded at the same time.

<video src="/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-22/2016-05-13-091634.webm"
       controls width="800" height="450" preload="auto"></video>
