---
title: "ErgoDox: Day 87 - Heat & ADORE"
date: 2016-07-18 14:00
tags: [Hacking, Keyboard, ErgoDox, Ergonomics, ADORE]
---

It's been a while I posted an update about my ErgoDox journey, and there's a lot
to talk about, now that I'm back from vacation. Today, we have two main topics:
trackballs and heatmaps. The two are not connected, it just happens that I write
about both at the same time.

Lets start with a bit of history, to perhaps shed some light on why I did what I
will explain just a few paragraphs below! I have been using the Dvorak layout
for a while now, and while it is a definite improvement over QWERTY, it does
have its shortcomings, so I was looking into ways to improve on it, while
keeping some of its most desirable properties, like the hand alteration. I
played a bit with various layout generators, but I found most - if not all - of
them hard to use. Besides, when typing, I'm not just looking for raw efficiency,
but comfort and feeling too. There are things that I **feel** are right as they
are, but I find it hard to express that to a generator. Yet, I do not want to
blindly design a new layout, based on feelings alone, that would be equally bad.
So, I need some data: I want to know which keys I press, and how often. I want
to be able to limit which rows, or which set of keys to limit the research to
(for example, to see how to rearrange the number row, I want to see the use of
the keys there in their isolation).

In short, I need a heatmap.

<!-- more -->

With a heatmap, I can easily see which keys are most frequently used, and which
are in bad position. All I need is a program that monitors the keys I press, and
puts the results on a keyboard! Sounds easy, doesn't it? Well, I have found no
program that could display the heatmap over an ErgoDox, and they all suffer from
one huge drawback: they only see what the OS sees, and that is sometimes
misleading. For example, to get the `:` key, I do not press `Shift`. For the
heatmap to be really usefol for what I want to use it for, I need to collect
what positions the pressed keys are in, on the physical keyboard, and lay that
out on an ErgoDox, as a heatmap.

This is why I ended up adding a keylogger to my firmware: it logs all the key
positions, whenever a key is pressed, and when it is released. It has no
knowledge of layout, and it doesn't need it, either. I have a separate tool that
parses that output, and creates a heatmap from it, and that has some knowledge
of the layout.

![Heatmap](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-87/heatmap-1.png)

The map above is what I gathered by using the keyboard for about three days,
before I went on vacation. Some problems of the layout are immediately obvious:

* The right pinky is way overloaded.
* The right hand is overloaded too.
* There are keys on the home row that are used less than keys above or beyond
  the row.
* There are keys on the row below the home row, that see more use than some of
  the keys on the row above.

Why are these bad? Because hand alteration is best when both hands do nearly
equal amounts of work. The balance does not need to be perfect, but what this
map shows is certainly bad. Especially on the right pinky, poor finger. As for
keys an the rows above- or below the home row, the row below is less comfortable
to reach than the row above, so key priority is home row first, above, and then
below. Pinky needs some work too, but it's the weakest finger. Ring-finger can
do a lot more, but mine is not the most accurate, or dexterous, so it should see
limited use, too. Middle and index - those are the main workers, along with the
thumbs. But they must not be overloaded, either.

Hard stuff. I have been staring at this map for hours, and came up with a
layout, that I think will work well, and keep all the good properties of Dvorak,
and improve on it:

![ADORE](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-87/adore.png)

At the time of this writing, this layout is still a work in progress, and I have
not used it all that much yet, either. There will be further tweaks, I am sure.
The number row will be rearranged, for one. But it is too early to tell how good
this one may be.

Nevertheless, one thing appears to be crystal clear: I use the `R` key more
often than `H`, so the former goes on the home row. And this gave the name of
the layout: if you start with `A`, and alternate between the sides, it spells
out `ADORE`, which I found to be a cool name for the layout. I'll be keeping the
`R` where it is!

### Orbital experiences

Shortly before leaving for vacation, work ordered me a
[Kensington Orbit][orbit], and I started playing with it this morning. I must
say I'm surprised! The last time I tried a trackball, I hated it. Now, I took a
leap of faith, figuring that my old gripes are gone. I spent days imagining how
a trackball would feel, and concluded I'll like it. Nevertheless, I chose one of
the cheapest ones - but not a thumb-operated one, because I eventually plan to
put it between the two keyboard halves -, in case I'm wrong. I wasn't.

 [orbit]: http://www.kensington.com/us/us/4493/k72337us/orbitspan-classregsymspan-trackball-with-scroll-ring

It was surprisingly easy to switch to a trackball, took maybe a minute to get
accurate enough for most tasks. I still can't click on small icons, but that's
not a big deal, because I don't want to do that anyway. Mousing around feels
significantly more comfortable now: I don't have to move my hands around and
wave on the table like an idiot - I can just caress a nice blue ball. The
buttons are well placed, and I don't miss the middle button, either. I used that
primarily to open links in a new tab, but I can do that with tapping `Control`
before clicking, which is good enough.

But by far the best thing about the mouse is the scroll ring. Smooth, precise,
and very easy to control. This is the kind of thing you instantly fall in love
with, and don't want to ever use something without it again. It's that good. I
was not expecting this to be the most useful feature of the trackball, but it
certainly left the biggest impression on me so far!

I don't think I'll have any issues using it long term.

### Next up

In the next part of my journey, due sometime next week, if all goes well, I'll
talk a bit more about my experience with a standing desk, and will hopefully
have a better idea about the **ADORE** layout. I plan to play with it a few
minutes each morning.
