---
title: "ErgoDox: Day 40"
date: 2016-06-01 15:00
tags: [Hacking, Keyboard, ErgoDox, Ergonomics]
---

For the past week, I have only applied tiny tweaks and bugfixes to my
[ErgoDox layout][layout], it appears that I have finally arrived to the part of
the journey where the core remains the same. Because the changes - apart from a
new, experimental layer - are all very small, this time, I will not only talk
about the ErgoDox, but also compare it to my previous keyboard, the
[TypeMatrix 2030][typematrix].

 [layout]: https://github.com/algernon/ergodox-layout#algernons-layout
 [typematrix]: http://www.typematrix.com/2030/features.php

<!-- more -->

Lets start with what changed in the layout, and why! I did some refactoring in
the code, but these had no change in functionality - these were done to ease
future maintenance, and development. Then, I added a [Plover][plover] layer,
pictured below, and a bugfix grew out of that.

 [plover]: http://www.openstenoproject.org/plover/

 ![Plover layer](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-40/plover-layer.png)
 
I have been interested in Steno for a long time - my Grandmother used to be a
typist, and copy-writer, and she told me about the shortcuts she made to me able
to write at the same speed my Grandfather was speaking. As a young boy, I found
this fascinating, but pretty much forgot all about it until I started to look
into keyboards last year. And then the memories all came back, and nostalgia
took over my heart. I wanted to learn Steno, because of nostalgia, because I
find it interesting, and because I plan to go back to university at some point,
and being able to not only take notes, but write down **everything** (or close
to it, anyway), would me a terrific asset.

So I installed [Plover][plover], and created a layer to use it with. I could
have configured the software to work with my normal Dvorak layout too, but it
felt better to have a dedicated layer. That also allowed me to have the layer
toggle key also toggle Plover.

I've only been playing with this for a day or two, but it is a lot of fun, and
the Plover guide is incredible. Even if you do not intend to learn Steno, I
highly recommend reading and following it, because you can learn a lot about the
language, and your typing habits too. And it is incredibly entertaining too! I
could practice Steno all day, and not get bored.

What I already see, is that the learning curve is steep. And when I say steep,
imagine a huge, thick concrete wall, which you have to carve your way through
using nothing else than a tiny screwdriver. Yet, it is fascinating. But it will
take many months, or even years, before I will feel fluent with Plover - I can
only afford an hour at best daily for practice, and I'm a very slow learner when
it comes to memorising things.

During my experiments with Plover, it turned out that my keyboard was not in
NKRO mode, and could handle only six keys pressed at the same time. Fortunately,
this was easy to fix with a single line, that forced NKRO to be on by default.

## ErgoDox vs the TypeMatrix

I got my first non-traditonal keyboard in 2010, I think. I was through a tough
period at work, during which I typed a lot more than I usually do - I prefer to
think more, and type less. Needless to say, with bad posture, terrible
keyboards, and years of abuse, I developed all kinds of pains in both of my
hands. Wrists, fingers, and even my forearm was throbbing with pain. Wasn't fun.

To combat this, I started looking into possible solutions, and one of the
easiest ones seemed to be switching away from QWERTY to Dvorak. At the time I
thought I could make this gradually, so I searched for a keyboard that had a
hardware Dvorak switch, and had replaceable legends. You see, I was not properly
touch-typing at the time: I could type without looking at the keyboard, but from
time to time - especially after making a mistake - I had to look at the legends
to reorient myself.

 ![TypeMatrix 2030](/assets/asylum/images/posts/looking-for-a-keyboard/typematrix-2030.jpg)

With these requirements, I found the [TypeMatrix 2030][typematrix], which had
other nice, ergonomic properties, that immediately spiked my interest: matrix
layout, big `Enter` and `Backspace` keys in the middle, and skinnability!
Awesome stuff.

 [typematrix]: http://www.typematrix.com/2030/features.php

Getting used to the layout wasn't too bad, took a couple of days maybe, and then
it felt so natural, that going back to a traditional keyboard was like torture.
So I ended up buying one for home use too.

Compared to this, my ErgoDox layout is very different.

 ![Base layout](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-34/base-layer.png)

While I wanted to learn Dvorak, I never really did until very recently. I
switched to Dvorak full-time in January this year, roughly, and I learned
proper-ish touch typing (it's still in progress) on the ErgoDox. Comparing the
two keyboards is hard, because I also switched layouts, and the way I type too.

### Comfort

The ErgoDox is undoubtedly more comfortable: the thumb keys are incredible, I
got used to them so much, that at home, where I still use the TypeMatrix, I
sometimes end up tapping the table, trying to hit a thumb key. Must look very
funny!

Switching from having `Enter` and `Backspace` in the middle to having them on
the thumb clusters, on the different sides took some time to get used to, but
was not as big a problem as I expected.

Modifiers on the thumb cluster was even less an issue, surprisingly! And I must
say, I find it very convenient that I don't have to use my pinkies for them.
Pinkies are not made to press and hold keys, thumbs are a much better fit to
hammer these.

One thing the TypeMatrix is better at, is the dedicated cursor keys. I miss
those on the ErgoDox sometimes, finding alternative ways of navigation is
neither the most comfortable, nor the easiest thing to learn.

Apart from the difference in layout, the ErgoDox has other properties that
contribute to it feeling more comfortable: being split, and being easier to tent
and tilt, I can position it in such a way that feels much more comfortable than
a traditional keyboard. Let me illustrate this with a picture!

 ![Desktop @ Work](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-40/desk.jpg)
 
As is immediately obvious, the ErgoDox halves are much farther apart than the
TypeMatrix. This position feels more comfortable to me, by a lot. The two sides
are also tented a bit differently, something that is harder to achieve on a
traditional keyboard. Yet, my right hand seems to need and want a different
tilt.

### Speed

I can't properly compare speeds, because by the time I started to measure my
speed, I was halfway down the Dvorak path, and my former QWERTY speed has seen a
significant drop. Based on the 85-90 WPM I did manage to achieve in the early
days of my switch, I estimate that my QWERTY speed was around 95-100. On Dvorak,
I am past that now, in a way: on known text, my top speed to this date is 119
WPM, on the ErgoDox. On the TypeMatrix, I'm much slower, because I struggle
without the thumb keys. When I got the ErgoDox, I made a few runs on the
TypeMatrix, and I was around 60 WPM on both known and unknown text. For known, I
surpassed that already. For unknown text, my highest on the ErgoDox is 61 WPM,
and I average around 55.

In conclusion, speed-wise the ErgoDox is ahead by now. Well ahead, because I
usually type known text: stuff I just made up in my head.

### Other observations

Another obvious observation is the feel of the keys. The ErgoDox is mechanical,
and with my Gateron Browns, typing is an enjoyable experience, even though I
mash the keys usually, and bottom out. It is, as as consequence, louder,
noticeably, but well within acceptable limits, and I received no complaints in
the office yet.

The other obvious, but important factor is size and ease of transport. In this
regard, the TypeMatrix wins hands down. The ErgoDox is hard to carry into a
meeting room. I plan to get something like the [Planck][planck] or the
[Preonic][preonic] for this purpose, but I'm not sure. I may just stick with the
old keyboard for those rare times that I need to carry my laptop somewhere.

 [planck]: http://olkb.com/planck/
 [preonic]: http://olkb.com/preonic/
 
The last observation, which may not be as important - or even desirable - for
the average user, is the programmability of the ErgoDox. Without that, it would
be a useless piece of electronics, because I would not have been able to tame it
to my needs. Any keyboard I buy in the future will need to have open source
firmware I can hack on, otherwise the [sweet stuff][blog:day-34] I could do with
this board would be missing, and once spoiled, I'm not giving up my comfort.

 [blog:day-34]: /blog/2016/05/26/ergodox-day-34/

## The future

In the distant future, there are a couple of things I want to try: contoured
keyboards (but a split one, like [Dactyl][dactyl], I am not interested in
non-split ones, except for travel purposes), and foot pedals. It would be an
interesting experiment to put the `Space` on a foot pedal, and drum with my foot
all day long.

 [dactyl]: https://github.com/adereth/dactyl-keyboard

Using a piano, or a midi keyboard would also be an interesting experiment, one
that I will almost certainly try, because I wanted to learn to play the piano
anyway.

But these things are in the far future. More short-term, I need a new way to
mouse. While mousekeys are nice and all, they are not the most comfortable
things to use. So I need something better, and I've been researching trackballs
to replace my mouse with. Will see how that goes in the next couple of months -
no budget for such experiments right now.

