---
title: "ErgoDox: Day 97 - Progressing slowly"
date: 2016-07-28 10:15
tags: [Hacking, Keyboard, ErgoDox, Ergonomics]
---

Since the [last update][blog:ergodox:87] not much has happened with the layout.
There were some minor changes, but nothing spectacular. Instead, I've been doing
a lot of research, or at least, trying to. The focus is now on the ADORE layer,
and I'm collecting data, analyzing the layout, and similar things. For example,
here is an updated heatmap of my current, Dvorak layout:

 ![Heatmap](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-97/heatmap-1.png)
 
 [blog:ergodox:87]: /blog/2016/07/18/ergodox-day-87/
 
This heatmap is based on pretty much all my keypresses between the 4th of July
and today.
 
<!-- more -->

I have been tweaking the [Carpalx][carpalx] tools to analyze - and perhaps
optimize - my layouts, and so far, it agrees with me that ADORE is in at least
some ways, an improvement over Dvorak: the hand usage is better balanced, and
there's less work for the pinkies. But the layout does not feel good yet - it
feels worse than Dvorak sometimes, the `L` is in a terrible position for
example, and so is `Y`. Oh, as a reminder, the ADORE layout is this:

 ![ADORE](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-87/adore.png)

 [carpalx]: http://mkweb.bcgsc.ca/carpalx/
 
I am working on a solution that would translate the keylogged data I collect on
Dvorak, to the ADORE layout, so I can compare how the heatmap of typing the same
thing on Dvorak and ADORE would look. Not quite there yet, but eventually...

In the meantime, as I said above, I'm playing with Carpalx. There are a lot of
knobs to configure to make it measure and optimize in a way I prefer it, so no
real useful output from here yet. The only thing I could reliably use it for so
far, is analyzing the layout, for hand and finger distribution. That gave me a
bit of confidence that I'm on the right track, but there's still some way to go.

Maybe by the time I write the next update, I will have more useful things to report on.

## Orbital experiences

I've been using the trackball for more than a week now, and I'm still loving it.
The scroll ring is incredible, and I don't thing I'll ever be able to use a
mouse or a trackball without one: it's so much more convenient than a scroll
wheel, and more precise too! Highly recommended.

Not much else to say about the trackball: it just works. It's not programmable,
though that would be a very nice thing. A real time sink too... I spend enough
time tweaking my keyboard, if I could tweak the behaviour of my mouse similarly,
I'd never get any work done, heh.

## Standing desk

At work, I'm still sitting, and will continue to do so, for some time. At home,
standing is still good, but I found that the solution I use now, is far from
perfect. I have a small table (pictured below, without the feet) on top of my
table, with the hole inside facing sideways. On top of this, I have another box
to raise my monitor, and the space in front of that box is used for my mouse and
the keyboard.

 ![Small table](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-97/small-table.jpg)
 
This setup allows me to use the small table as a kind of podium: lean on its
sides, and grab around the edges. This is very convenient. However, all this has
downsides too! There is very little space for the keyboard and the mouse, which
is an issue, because at home, I still use a regular mouse (my trackball for home
use has not arrived yet), and once my [ErgoDox EZ](https://ergodox-ez.com/)
arrives, there will not be enough space for the keyboard, if I want to use a
distance between the two halves similar to what I have at work.

Thus, I will need to turn the table, and lose the podium-like property, and find
a few more boxes to stack under the monitor. Some of my cables will be more
exposed this way too, but that's not that big a deal.

Nevertheless, standing is still convenient, I love being able to walk around
whenever I feel like it. I can also go and sit down, if I'm reading a longer
article, or if I'm thinking, and do not need access to my peripherals. I do that
a few times a day. Standing long hours is just as bad as sitting all day, so I'm
trying to keep a reasonable balance.

It's still very early to form a definitive opinion, though. But so far, so good!

## Next up

By the time of the next update, I should have a second ErgoDox EZ for home use,
a trackball at home, new keycaps, a keycap puller, and a slightly modified
standing desk. Not to mention, more data for the heatmap, and more experience
with Carpalx.

The next update looks promising, can't wait to write about all these things!
