---
title: "ErgoDox: Day 48"
date: 2016-06-09 16:30
tags: [Hacking, Keyboard, ErgoDox, Ergonomics]
---

In the past week and a bit, [my layout][layout] did not change much at all,
neither behaviour, nor key location. It appears I reached a state where I feel
sufficiently comfortable. Therefore I will be talking less about the keyboard
now, or how I am taming it, and instead focus on something I am experimenting
with: creating my own alphanumeric layout.

 [layout]: https://github.com/algernon/ergodox-layout#algernons-layout
 
Having reached a reasonable proficiency in typing Dvorak, and having used it
full-time for some time made me realise that while the layout itself is
infinitely more comfortable than QWERTY, and has some desirable - at least,
desirable for me - properties like hand alteration, it is not without problems.
I will try to explore what I experienced, and how I am trying to solve those
shortcomings.

<!-- more -->

## The defaul layout

![Base layer](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-48/base-layer.png)

My default layout, your average Dvorak, with only very minor changes: the `-`
key is both on the left side in pinky position, and on the right side,
accessible by both the index finger and a thumb. On standard Dvorak, it wound be
to the right of the `S` key. I found the button by the `Z` key to be awkward to
tap with the pinky, and `-` is a key I use often, so I moved it to a more
accessible place.

For similar reasons, `:` appears twice too, but with a twist: the one close to
the thumb and index finger is always shifted, `;` is only available on the pinky
position.

But these are only two symbols, and if we want to be strict, only the `-` moved,
the thumb/index positioned keys are not part of the standard Dvorak layout.

## Problems with Dvorak

The more I worked with Dvorak, the more issues I found with it, some smaller,
some bigger. By far the most annoying part is the `L` key, banished to the right
half into a pinky position, despite it being a reasonably frequent letter.

Another key I happen to tap often is `Q` - again, in a not ideal position on
standard Dvorak. At least it is not under the pinky, but the ring finger is not
the most dexterous finger I have, and bending it downwards to reach `Q` is not
the most comfortable thing in the world.

Then there are a set of keys which are in reasonable positions, when considered
in isolation, but throughout the day, I tap them in combination with other
nearby keys, which results in less alteration and more rolls than what I'd
prefer. For example `G` and `H` are under each other, and tapping them in this
order wasn't feeling right. Similarly, `S` and `Z`, a common combination in
Hungarian was even worse: both on the pinky, on the same side! Argh!

Once these issues were identified, I paid a little more attention to what I do
not feel comfortable with, and it turned out that `W` and `V` being beside each
other was challenging to remember. One of my most frequent mistakes in the past
couple of days was mixing these two up.

## Looking for existing solutions

I looked into a few Dvorak variants, and one of them stood out:
[Capewell-Dvorak][cpdv], pictured below, on a normal keyboard.

 [cpdv]: http://www.michaelcapewell.com/projects/keyboard/layout_capewell-dvorak.htm

![Capewell-Dvorak](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-48/capewell-dvorak.png)

This layout addresses a number of my issues with Dvorak, by moving `L`, `V` and
`Z` to better positions. I tried the layout for a short while, but decided
against it, because it introduced more new issues than what it fixed:
rearranging the vowels interfered with my **Emacs** layer, and I felt no need to
mix these up. Even though the reasoning to do so is solid, I am used to the
Dvorak layout now, feel comfortable with the order of the vowels, and have no
desire to retrain my muscles for some very minor advantage. It also did not
address my problem with `G` and `H`, and blew up the whole bottom row on the
left side, to maintain QWERTY-compatible `ZXCV`. I do not care about
QWERTY-compatibility, and with one-shot modifiers, `CTRL-C` is as convenient -
or even more so! - on Dvorak than on QWERTY. Remember, my `Control` is on the
thumb cluster!

So, sadly, Capewell-Dvorak did not work out as well as I had hoped. But the
layout - and the post describing and introducing it - gave me enough hints to
start experimenting with my own layout, taylored to my needs, and based on my
use-cases, desires and whims.

## The experiment

Observing which keys I use, and what combinations feel bad, I came up with the following layout:

![Experimental layer](/assets/asylum/images/posts/ergodox-day-48/experimental-layer.png)

There is no sound research behind this, and some of the choices are likely not
the best if you are aiming to optimise the layout for maximum efficiency, but my
goal wasn't that anyway. My goal was to find something I find comfortable.

So what did I change and why?

I moved `L` to the index position on the right side, where `B` used to be. As
this is a frequent key, it deserves a stronger finger. On the other hand, `B` is
much less frequent, so I moved that to the old position of `V`, just below `N`.
This meant that `W` and `V` are no longer neighbours, yay! The next issue to
solve was `Z`, it had to move from under `S`, so I switched it with `;`. This
way, typing `sz` or `zs` (not unheard of in Hungarian!) means hand alteration,
which I find comfortable.

The keys these replaced had to move elsewhere: `V` moved to the other half, to
the position `J` was at, just below `E`, and `J` moved to the right half, top
pinky position after `R`, to where `L` used to be.

Now, I needed `Q` in a better position, so I borrowed another idea from
Capewell-Dvorak, and moved it to the old `F` position, while `F` shifted one to
the right, replacing `G`, and thus breaking the `gh` combo up into a more
convenient alteration. But since `G` moved, to the old position of `K`, we
needed to move that key too, and there was an empty spot at the old `Q`
position, it moved there.

And this pretty much covers all the changes. This layout addresses all the
complaints I have had against Dvorak or Capewell-Dvorak, and by the looks of it,
will work fine. However, I am not using this layout yet, because I do not have
the time to retrain my fingers just yet. So I play with it for about ten minutes
each day to see if anything needs improving. I do not aim for any speeds, nor do
I try to memorize the layout, I just look at a printed sheet and try a few
things, both typing and key sequences I use to control Emacs.

Once I have a split keyboard at home, I will devote more time to fully switch to
this layout - or whatever I turn it into until such time. For the time being, it
remains as an extra layer on the keyboard, for a few minutes of playtime each
day.

## A note on other layouts

Since my [day 40](/blog/2016/06/01/ergodox-day-40/) post, I have been approached
by a similar question by a number of people: *why Dvorak, and not something
else? Something that is more efficient?*

The answer is very simple: when I first started looking into alternative
layouts, I was not touch typing properly, I needed legends to reorient myself,
and I wanted a keyboard with a layout that wasn't QWERTY, and had appropriate
legends. I only found Dvorak, so that was it. Replacing keycaps was out of the
question at the time.

Since then, I never felt the urge to learn other layouts such as Norman, Colemak
or Workman. I just don't see the appeal. They may be closer to QWERTY, but for
me, that is a huge disadvantage, because my muscle-memory already rewired itself
for Dvorak. They may be more efficient, and spread the load better between the
hands, but they all lack the hand alteration I have with Dvorak, and focus on
rolls instead, which I found less convenient.

I do not look for the most efficient layout, nor the most ergonomic. I look for
one I find comfortable, one I can type at an acceptable speed. This includes a
focus on hand alteration, and possibly inefficient choices to cater to my own
whims. For example, the `C` key could easily be moved elsewhere - like, swap it
with `L` -, but I like it where it is.

As long as I feel ok with the layout, I am not interested in learning a new one
for some small improvement. Let alone learning layouts very different to what I
use now! I did that once, changing from QWERTY to Dvorak, not keen on doing so
again, unless there is no other option.

## Next up

I am nearing a stage where the layout and the behavior of the keyboard is
perfect, and when I stop tweaking it even further. As such, the focus of these
posts will shift towards my next project in transforming my environment: mice
and trackballs, which in turn will likely be followed by standing desks. With
some intermission once my [keyboardio M01](https://shop.keyboard.io/) arrives.

And during that time, I will be working on improving my Steno too. But that's
going to be a long process, one I will not be reporting on all that frequently.
