resources/posts/2017-10-13-leaving-twitter.md, before:

---
title: "Leaving Twitter"
date: 2017-10-13 13:00
tags: ["Rants"]
---

Twitter has been an increasingly frustrating experience lately, doing everything
they can to alienate me. Today, they succeeded, and I will not be posting on
there anymore. I will neither tweet, retweet, nor favourite, my account has been
put into a read-only mode. I'm still keeping it, because there are people there
whom I follow, and who have not left the birdsite yet. But I will not be
interacting with it in any other way. By the end of the year, I plan to leave
Twitter behind completely, including deleting my past tweets too.

I've been [micro-blogging on Mastodon][m:a] since April, originally posting both
there and on twitter, but increasingly more only over there. From today onwards,
I'll be using it exclusively.

 [m:a]: https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/@algernon

There are many reasons I favor [Mastodon][m:join] over Twitter:

 [m:join]: https://joinmastodon.org/

<!-- more -->

Mastodon does not try to control my feed. It does not inject neither
advertisements, nor things "we thought you would like" (such as people liking
stuff in my notifications). It does not control how I consume my feed, it does
not restrict me to one officially sanctioned client, but allows me to [write my
own][mad-tooter]. It gives me all the tools I need to consume my feed whatever
way I want to:

 ![Mad Tooter](https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/system/media_attachments/files/000/286/474/original/34b774a9c1822e60.png)

 [mad-tooter]: https://github.com/algernon/mad-tooter

It allows me to run my own server, so I'm not at the mercy of a corporation that
clearly does not share the same values I do, a corporation that not only fails
to handle abuse on their platform, but are doing everything they can to profit
off of the highest profile, worst abusers, as long as they can. I'm not going to
assist with that.

Instead, I'll be using a federated network where I own my content, I'm in
control of how and what I see. A network where I can have meaningful
interactions, where I can discover new people more easily, because it doesn't
try to push the already famous my way, but lets me do the discovery as I see
fit. A network that respects my values (and I can distance myself from parts of
it that does not, if it ever comes to that), a network where I'm not the
product, a network that does not profit off of abusers.

I can no longer pretend that Twitter is a useful service, that I gain more from
it than what I give up for using it. It's been steadily pushing the scales the
wrong way, and I no longer feel it is worth pretending that the pros and cons
are balanced. They aren't anymore, and therefore, as of today, I'm gone.

Find me on [Mastodon][m:join] instead, at
[@algernon@trunk.mad-scientist.club][m:a]. A far better place. I've had better
conversations on there in the past few months than I ever had on Twitter. I've
been following a lot of interesting folk, some of whom were never on the
birdsite. Being able to see the federated timeline is much more powerful than
Twitter's recommendation system. I can - and I did - discover things Twitter
would never have let me.

If you are interested in my micro-blogging, I encourage you to [join
Mastodon][m:join].

 [m:a]: https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/@algernon
 [m:join]: https://joinmastodon.org/

Commit message:

Replace Mastodon with Fediverse
Mastodon is the name of a particular software suite, the community itself is the
Fediverse. Use the latter to refer to it.

Fixes #11.

Signed-off-by: Gergely Nagy <me@gergo.csillger.hu>

resources/posts/2017-10-13-leaving-twitter.md, after:

---
title: "Leaving Twitter"
date: 2017-10-13 13:00
tags: ["Rants"]
---

Twitter has been an increasingly frustrating experience lately, doing everything
they can to alienate me. Today, they succeeded, and I will not be posting on
there anymore. I will neither tweet, retweet, nor favourite, my account has been
put into a read-only mode. I'm still keeping it, because there are people there
whom I follow, and who have not left the birdsite yet. But I will not be
interacting with it in any other way. By the end of the year, I plan to leave
Twitter behind completely, including deleting my past tweets too.

I've been [micro-blogging on the fediverse][f:a] since April, originally posting
both there and on twitter, but increasingly more only over there. From today
onwards, I'll be using it exclusively.

 [f:a]: https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/@algernon

There are many reasons I favor [Mastodon][m:join] over Twitter:

 [m:join]: https://joinmastodon.org/

<!-- more -->

The fediverse does not try to control my feed. It does not inject neither
advertisements, nor things "we thought you would like" (such as people liking
stuff in my notifications). It does not control how I consume my feed, it does
not restrict me to one officially sanctioned client, but allows me to [write my
own][mad-tooter]. It gives me all the tools I need to consume my feed whatever
way I want to:

 ![Mad Tooter](https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/system/media_attachments/files/000/286/474/original/34b774a9c1822e60.png)

 [mad-tooter]: https://github.com/algernon/mad-tooter

It allows me to run my own server, so I'm not at the mercy of a corporation that
clearly does not share the same values I do, a corporation that not only fails
to handle abuse on their platform, but are doing everything they can to profit
off of the highest profile, worst abusers, as long as they can. I'm not going to
assist with that.

Instead, I'll be using a federated network where I own my content, I'm in
control of how and what I see. A network where I can have meaningful
interactions, where I can discover new people more easily, because it doesn't
try to push the already famous my way, but lets me do the discovery as I see
fit. A network that respects my values (and I can distance myself from parts of
it that does not, if it ever comes to that), a network where I'm not the
product, a network that does not profit off of abusers.

I can no longer pretend that Twitter is a useful service, that I gain more from
it than what I give up for using it. It's been steadily pushing the scales the
wrong way, and I no longer feel it is worth pretending that the pros and cons
are balanced. They aren't anymore, and therefore, as of today, I'm gone.

Find me on [the fediverse][m:join] instead, at
[@algernon@trunk.mad-scientist.club][f:a]. A far better place. I've had better
conversations on there in the past few months than I ever had on Twitter. I've
been following a lot of interesting folk, some of whom were never on the
birdsite. Being able to see the federated timeline is much more powerful than
Twitter's recommendation system. I can - and I did - discover things Twitter
would never have let me.

If you are interested in my micro-blogging, I encourage you to [join the
fediverse][m:join].

 [f:a]: https://trunk.mad-scientist.club/@algernon
 [m:join]: https://joinmastodon.org/
