---
title: "From Patreon to Liberapay"
date: 2017-12-11 01:20
tags: [Patreon, keyboardio]
---

Patreon [recently
announced](https://blog.patreon.com/updating-patreons-fee-structure/) that they
will restructure their fees, but they are doing so in such a way that hurts me,
and hurts my patrons. For a $1 contribution, they'd charge $1.35, and each
contribution would be charged individually, instead of one bulk charge at the
start of the month. This makes small contributions very expensive, especially
when one does many small contributions.

As a creator, seeing my patrons inconvenienced hurts me. I am in a privileged
position that I do not depend on my Patreon income. If it stops completely, I
won't be in any kind of financial trouble. Therefore, I opted to close my
creator account on Patreon. This also provided me an opportunity to rethink
where, how, and if I want to continue offering people to financially support me,
or my projects.

You see, I originally signed up on Patreon to support the [Keyboards for the
Twins][blog:twin-keyboard] project, and I now consider that secured. So lets
have a look then on the where, how, and if!

 [blog:twin-keyboard]: /blog/2017/03/10/rose-tinted-glasses/#non-code-contributions

<!-- more -->

Over the course of the past nine months since the original announcement of the
[Keyboards for the Twins][blog:twin-keyboard] project, patrons contributed the
price of a DIY keyboard kit, roughly. That money is now resting on a separate
account, created just for this purpose. In the coming years, I'll match the
other keyboard, and add some more myself. With this, the project is financially
secure.

 [blog:twin-keyboard]: /blog/2017/03/10/rose-tinted-glasses/#non-code-contributions

The original plan was that I'll finance the tools needed for this too, but it
turns out I [may need those tools sooner][ommatidia], so the Twin Keyboards only
need the components, I suppose.

 [ommatidia]: https://algernon.github.io/Ommatidia/journal.html

But this left me with a dilemma: I did not - and still don't - feel comfortable
with accepting money for things I'm either already paid to do, or things I would
do or create anyway. The aforementioned project was a loophole, and as things
currently stand, it does not need further funding.

What shall I do then?

This question is doubly pressing, because most of the perks I listed on Patreon
were related to [Kaleidoscope][k], but I am working for [Keyboardio][keyboardio]
part-time since [late November][kbdio:december-update]. Therefore, even my
keyboard firmware work is funded and paid for. What reason would I have for
allowing people to send me money?

 [k]: https://github.com/keyboardio/Kaleidoscope
 [keyboardio]: https://shop.keyboard.io/
 [kbdio:december-update]: https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/keyboardio/the-model-01-an-heirloom-grade-keyboard-for-seriou/posts/2065938#h:firmware-and-softwar

I've been told by many, that if people want to throw money my way, for whatever
reason, I should let them. If they decided they want to, why should I stop them?
But I do not work that way. There are times when I feel the temptation, but then
the disagreeing voices kick in with full force. However, the more I talked about
this topic with friends and family, the more they managed to sway my thinking. I
do not know who - and when - managed to shed a new light on accepting money, but
they did. Instead of asking myself things like "Why should I accept money for
things I'm already paid for, or things I will do anyway?", or "Why should I let
people donate to me without any particular reason?", I should ask "Why do I want
to stop them from doing what they feel is right?".

Why should I? If I were on the other end, and wanted to pitch in, to support
someone, or some project, and they'd object, I would indeed feel a bit
disappointed. I mean, it feels **good** to give. If one has the resources,
giving is a good thing. Why should I go and fight against that? If I tell people
honestly that I'm financially okay, that I'm paid for my work - and for which
I'm not, I'd do anyway -, and they still want to donate, I have no reason to
stop them. If giving makes them happy, I should not stand in the way.

For these reasons, I decided that instead of just closing my Patreon creator
account and calling it a day, I moved to [Liberapay][l], with a different goal,
a different mindset. If you want to support my hobbies, that's one way to do it.

Do keep in mind that I have a day job, and am working for Keyboardio part-time
too, so most of my free software contributions are already being funded and paid
for. But if you feel that giving would make you happy, regardless of these
facts, I'm not going to stand in your way, and will thank you for your
contribution.

 [l]: https://liberapay.com/algernon
