---
title: "Hecate"
date: 2018-10-18 15:45
tags: [Hardware, Hecate]
---

Yesterday was an inspiring day. I came across a write-up about the [Ultimate Writer][ult-writer], an e-ink computer/digital typewriter, in a beautiful wooden case. This sent me down a deep rabbit hole for a whole lot of reasons, some of them even being practical! You see, my weakness is stuff made out of wood. My other weakness is keyboards. My third, a distraction-free environment. This amazing build combines all of those, it was bound to suck me in.

 [ult-writer]: https://alternativebit.fr/posts/ultimate-writer/

<!-- more -->

So I'm going to build something similar. Not right now, but by spring or so. You see, we are moving to a new place, and there will be a park nearby, and I plan to go and sit out there (or in the nearby caffee, or the library), and need a portable device I can work with. I don't need it to be powerful, I'll usually be writing, worst case, logging into my desktop at home and work through that. I originally planned to buy a laptop, but... I don't like laptops much. I have no use for their built-in keyboards, I don't like how they look, and they're expensive and far too powerful for what I intend to use them for.

But with the Ultimate Writer as an inspiration, I can make something that is a much better fit. A beautiful device I can carry around, without useless parts, but features I do need. It won't be exactly like the Ultimate Writer, because I have slightly different goals, but it will be close enough.

I will be using an [Atreus][falbatech:atreus] as the keyboard, with an optional wrist rest. For this to work well, I need to be able to pull the keyboard holder part out, I think. I will also want to lock the Raspberry Pi into the case tighter, and leave some space beside it for other things, such as a spare battery, a charger, my wallet and papers, a notebook and a pen. Perhaps even my phone, if it fits. Since the Atreus is smaller than the keyboard used in the Ultimate Writer, I should have plenty of space for these things. Of course I could just make the case bigger, but I'd rather make it smaller if I can. Compact is nice. But back on the topic of keeping other stuff in the case: three boxes above the keyboard's area should do. One for the Raspberry Pi (or whatever small computer I end up using), one for the spare battery and charger, with my wallet & papers on top, and a third for a small notebook, a pen, and my phone. I also want to cover this area, but need to be able to open each box. Whether I want one large, openable cover, or three smaller ones, I'm not sure. Perhaps it could be a slider, and slide forward? Chances are, if I open this compartment, I don't want to use the keyboard at the same time. This would be easy to accomplish, too. Another option is to make it able to be opened upwards, like the case itself. But that looks a bit weird, I think.

 [falbatech:atreus]: https://falba.tech/product/atreus42-bamboo-case-lift/

The biggest changes, however, will be on the upper part: I will be using an LCD screen initially, for the simple reason that it's easier to work with. Figuring out the details about the case and sourcing everything will take enough time and effort that pushing the e-Ink screen into a state where I can use it for what I want to use it for is simply not possible, not within the timeframe I have. I will try to build things so that I can later replace the LCD, because the long-term goal is e-Ink. Like with the bottom half of the case, I want to hide as much of the electronics as possible, including the cable connecting the display and the Pi, if possible. For similar, aesthetic reasons, I want to have a frame for the screen.

There is no mouse, trackball, or trackpoint included. I shouldn't need that for this device, but if I do, I can add a mouse layer to the keyboard. Or build a small joystick and place it above the keyboard, there's plenty of space there. I just have to account for the USB cable, but... I can build the joystick's case so that it has space for it. Or maybe, just maybe, I could include a trackball instead. Dang, another rabbit hole!

This is as far as I've got with ideas so far. Looking ahead to building this thing! Which reminds me, I also want to have its name etched, or burned into the top of the case, kinda like the "ATREUS" text on the [original Atreus case][t:atreus].

 [t:atreus]: https://atreus.technomancy.us/

Question is, what shall be its name? The Ultimate Writer is already taken, and even though this will be a variant of that design, I don't think it would be appropriate. I think I also want something shorter. I went down another rabbit hole, starting from "Atreus", exploring both Greek mythology and the Dune universe. After a while, I had a set of names, but narrowed my two finalists down to "Aerope" and "Hecate". As it is likely obvious now, the latter won.

This will be an interesting project.
