---
title: "#DeleteFacebook"
date: 2019-03-18 09:00
tags: [Life, News]
---

> Your Account Is Scheduled for Permanent Deletion

On March 15, the anniversary of the 1848-49 Hungarian Revolution and war for
independence, I deleted my facebook account. Or at least started the process.
This is something I've been planning to do for a while, and the special day felt
like the perfect opportunity to do so. It wasn't easy, not because I used
facebook much - I did not, I haven't looked at my timeline in months, had a
total of 9 posts over the years (most of them private). I didn't "like" stuff,
and haven't interacted with the site in any meaningful way.

I did use Messenger, mostly to communicate with friends and family, convincing
at least some of them to find alternative ways to contact me wasn't without
issues. But by March 15, I got the most important people to use another
communication platform (XMPP), and I was able to hit the delete switch.

<!-- more -->

I have long despised facebook, for a whole lot of reasons, but most recently,
they started to expose my phone number, which I only gave them for 2FA purposes.
They exposed it in a way that I couldn't hide it from friends, either. That's a
problem because I don't want every person who I "friended" on there to know my
phone number. It's a privilege to know it, and facebook abusing its knowledge of
it was over the line. But this isn't the worst yet.

You see, facebook is so helpful that it lets people link their contacts with
their facebook friends. A lot of other apps are after one's contact list, and
now my phone number got into a bunch more of those. This usually isn't a big
deal, people will not notice. But programs will. Programs that hunt for phone
numbers to sell.

And this is exactly what happened: my phone number got sold. How do I know? I
got a call from an insurance company. One I never had any prior contact with,
nor did anyone in my family. I was asked if I have two minutes, and I frankly
told them that yes, I do, and I'd like to use that two minutes to inquire where
they got my phone number from, as per the GDPR, because as a data subject, I
have the right to know what data has been collected about me, how such data was
processed. I twisted the right a bit, and said I have the right to know how I
got into their database - I'm not sure I have this right. In any case, poor
caller wasn't prepared for this, took a bit more than two minutes to convince
him that he's better off complying with my request, otherwise they'll have a
formal GDPR data request and a complaint against him, personally filed within
hours.

A few hours later, I got a call back: they got my phone number from facebook. I
thanked them for the information, and asked them to delete all data they have
about me, and never contact me again. Yes, there's a conflict between those two
requests, we'll see how they handle it, let it be their problem figuring out how
to resolve it. Anyway, there's only a few possibilities how they could've gotten
my number through facebook:

- If I friended them, they'd have access. They wouldn't have my consent to use
  it for this kind of stuff, but they'd have the number. This isn't the case.
  I'm pretty sure I can't friend corporations on facebook (yet?) to begin with.
- Some of my friends had their contacts synced with facebook (I know of at least
  two who made this mistake, one of them by mistake, one too easily made), and
  had their contacts uploaded to the insurance company via their app, or some
  similarly shady process. This still doesn't mean I consented to being contacted.
- Facebook sold my number to them. Likewise, this doesn't imply consent, either.

They weren't able to tell me more than that they got my number from facebook. I
have a feeling that this is a lie anyway - they just don't know where they
bought it from, and facebook probably sounded like a reasonable source. On the
other hand, facebook selling one's personal data, despite the GDPR is something
I'm more than willing to believe, considering their past actions. Even if
facebook is not the one who sold the number, the fact that an insurance company
deemed it acceptable to lie and blame them paints an even worse picture.

In either case, facebook is a sickness I wanted to remove from my life, and this
whole deal was the final straw. I initiated the account deletion. They probably
won't delete anything, just disable it, and continue selling what they already
have about me. But at least I make it harder for them to obtain more info about
me. I started to migrate my family to better services: we use an XMPP server I
host, with end to end encryption, because noone should trust neither me, nor the
VPS provider the server is running on.

It's a painful break up, because there are a bunch of people who I talked with
on Messenger from time to time, who will not move away from facebook anytime
soon. There are parts of my family (my brother & sister) who will not install
another chat app just to chat with me - we'll fall back to phone calls, email
and SMS. Nevertheless, this had to be done. I'm lucky that I could, because I
wasn't using facebook for anything important to begin with. Many people can't
escape its clutches.

I wish there will be a day when all of my family is off of it. With a bit of
luck, we can raise our kids without facebook in their lives.
