---
title: "Solarium"
date: 2019-03-18 12:45
tags: [Hacking, Keyboard, Ergonomics, Solarium]
---

I wanted to build a keyboard for a long time, to prepare myself for building two
for our Twins when they're old enough, but always struggled with figuring out
*what* I want to build. I mean, I have the perfect keyboard for pretty much all
occasions: my daily driver is the [Keyboardio Model01][m01], which I use for
everything but the few cases highlighted next. For Steno, I use a
[Splitography][sgy]. When I need to be extra quiet, I use an [Atreus][atreus]
with Silent Reds. For gaming, I have a [Shortcut][shortcut] prototype, and use
the Atreus too, depending on the game. I don't travel much nowadays, so I have
no immediate need for a portable board, but the Atreus would fit that purpose
too.

 [m01]: https://shop.keyboard.io/
 [sgy]: https://softhruf.love/collections/writers
 [atreus]: https://atreus.technomancy.us/
 [shortcut]: http://shortcut.gg/

As it turns out there is one scenario I do not have covered: if I have to type
on my phone, I do not have a bluetooth keyboard to do it with, and have to rely
on the virtual keyboard. This is far from ideal. Why do I need to type on the
phone? Because sometimes I'm in a call at night, and need to be quiet, so I go
to another room - but I only have a phone with me there. I could use a laptop,
but since I need the phone *anyway*, carrying a phone and a laptop feels wrong,
when I could carry a phone and a keyboard instead.

So I'm going to build myself a bluetooth keyboard. But before I do that, I'll
build something simpler. Simpler, but still different enough from my current
keyboards that I can justify the effort going into the build process. It will
not be wireless at first, because during my research, I found that complicates
matters too much, at least for a first build.

A while ago, I had another attempt at coming up with a keyboard, which had
bluetooth, was split, and had a few other twists. We spent a whole afternoon
brainstorming on the name with the twins and my wife. I'll use that name for
another project, but I needed another one for the current one: I started down
the same path we used back then, and found a good one.

You see, this keyboard is going to feature a rotary encoder, with a big scrubber
knob on top of it, as a kind of huge dial. The knob will be in the middle,
surrounded by low-profile Kailh Choc keys.

## Solarium

<!-- more -->

> *balcony, dial, terrace, sundial, sunny spot*

The low-profile keys with a mix of black and white keycaps does look like a
terrace; the scrubber knob, a dial. So the name fits like a glove.

Now, I know very little about designing and building keyboards, so this first
attempt will likely end up being a colossal failure. But one has to start
somewhere, and this feels like a good start: simple enough to be possible,
different enough to be interesting and worthwhile.

It will be powered by the same `ATMega32U4` as many other keyboards, but unlike
most, it will have Kailh Choc switches for a very low profile. It will also
feature a rotary encoder, which I plan to use for various mouse-related tasks,
such as scrolling. Or volume setting. Or brightness adjustment. Stuff like that.

This means I'll have to add rotary encoder support to [Kaleidoscope][k], but
that shouldn't be too big of an issue.

 [k]: https://github.com/keyboardio/Kaleidoscope

### The layout

![Solarium](/assets/asylum/images/posts/solarium/solarium.svg)

(Original [KLE][solarium:kle])

 [solarium:kle]: http://www.keyboard-layout-editor.com/#/gists/5c9373fc0f55c170581c699b04ed61a7

The idea is that the wheel will act as a mouse scroll wheel by default. Pressing
the left `Fn` key, it will turn into volume control, pressing the right `Fn`
key, it will turn into brightness control. I haven't found other uses for it
yet, but I'm sure I will once I have the physical thing under my fingers. The
wheel is to be operated by the opposite hand that holds either `Fn`, or any hand
when no `Fn` is held. Usually that'll be the right hand, because `Shift` will be
on the left thumb cluster, and I need that for horizontal scrolling.

While writing this, I got another idea for the wheel: I can make it switch
windows or desktops. It can act as a more convenient `Alt+Tab`, too!

### Components

The most interesting component is likely the knob. I've been eyeing the
[Scrubber Knob][adafruit:scrubber] from Adafruit. Need to find a suitable
encoder, the one on Adafruit is [out of stock][adafruit:encoder]. One of the
main reasons I like this knob is that it's low profile.

 [adafruit:scrubber]: https://www.adafruit.com/product/2055
 [adafruit:encoder]: https://www.adafruit.com/product/377

For the rest, they're pretty usual stuff:

- [Kailh Choc switches][ali:kailh-choc]. Not sure whether I want reds or browns.
  I usually enjoy tactile switches, but one of the goals of this keyboard is to
  be quiet, and reds might be a better fit there.
- [Kailh Choc caps][novelkeys:caps]: I'll get a mix of black and white caps, for
  that terrace / balcony feeling.
- [ATMega32U4][ali:atmega]

 [ali:kailh-choc]: https://www.aliexpress.com/item/Kailh-low-profile-Switch-1350-Chocolate-Keyboard-Switch-RGB-SMD-kailh-Mechanical-Keyboard-white-stem-clicky/32959996455.html
 [ali:atmega]: https://www.aliexpress.com/item/New-Pro-Micro-for-arduino-ATmega32U4-5V-16MHz-Module-with-2-row-pin-header-For-Leonardo/32768308647.html
 [novelkeys:caps]: https://novelkeys.xyz/collections/keycaps/products/kailh-low-profile-keycaps-blank

Apart from this, I'll need a PCB, and perhaps a switch- and/or bottom plate, I
suppose. Like I said, I know next to nothing about building keyboards. I
originally wanted to hand-wire it, but Jesse Vincent told me I really don't want
to do that, and I'll trust him on that.

## Future plans

In the future, I plan to make a Bluetooth keyboard, and a split one (perhaps
both at the same time, as originally planned). I might experiment with adding
LEDs to the current one too as a next iteration. I also want to build a board
with hotswap switches, though I will likely end up with Kailh Box Royals I guess
(still need my samples to arrive first, mind you). We'll see once I built the
first one, I'm sure there will be lessons learned.
