---
title: "One hat less"
date: 2019-01-09 12:45
tags: [Debian, .planet.debian, Life]
---

Almost a week ago, on a snowy night of January 3, I hung up my Debian Developer
hat, and sent my retirement letter in. This has been a long time coming, and I
contemplated doing this many times over the past year or two, but never got the
courage and the willpower to retire. It wasn't easy. Debian has been part of my
life for the past two decades, and I've been a developer for about eighteen
years. I considered - and to some extent, still do - Debian my second family.
There have been times when Debian was my escape hatch, something I could focus
on to help me pass the days by. I've made friends, I've met people, I learned
humility, I learned empathy. If it weren't for Debian, I wouldn't be the person
I am today. Retiring felt like admitting defeat for a long time. But it isn't.

<!-- more -->

It's not defeat when you admit that your circumstances changed. It's not defeat
when you let others take better care of the stuff you've been neglecting for way
too long. It's not defeat when you're taking a break. It's not defeat when
you're reducing the amount of stress that keeps you awake at night. It's not
defeat when you do the right thing. It's not defeat when you gracefully retire:
rather, it is a start of something new.

I originally joined Debian for two reasons: I was a Debian user for a while by
then, and felt that I should be giving back, as I received so much from Debian.
The second reason wasn't this noble, but after eighteen years, I guess I could
admit it: the other reason I applied was vanity. Having a `@debian.org`
email-address was *something*.

At the time, I was... a different person. I was full of myself at times, I was
angry, perhaps a tad too elitist at times too. I'm not proud of old me, but it's
part of me. I grew, and became a better person, there's no shame in being able
to grow - quite the contrary. And Debian helped immensely. I've had role models
in the project, who I look up to even to this day, who helped shape me one way
or the other.

There are two people I need to mention specifically: [Martin Michlmayr][tbm] and
[Rhonda D'Vine][rhonda].

Martin was my Application Manager when I applied, I considered him a mentor, a
friend. The example he set were instrumental in shaping me too. Rhonda helped me
get to my first ever conference: I got on a train to Vienna, and she took me to
LinuxTag in her car from there, and then back again. That first LinuxTag, the
path that led there, the conference itself, was formative, and both Martin and
Rhonda had a big part in it being so. Thank you again - so many years later, I
still smile when I think back. Those years we were in touch, meant a lot to me.

 [tbm]: https://www.cyrius.com/
 [rhonda]: http://rhonda.deb.at/blog/

I often feel nostalgic about the times way back then, when I was active on IRC.
I miss the old bunch (oh, so many people I haven't talked to in years!). I miss
being active in Debian. I miss talking to fellow developers. But life took me
elsewhere, and there's only so many hours in a day. Over the years Debian and
me, we grew apart. There was always something more important, so my Debian
contributions dropped (though, I had some ups too, while I was ftp-master
assistant for example). By 2018, I barely did anything, and one of my
resolutions for the new year was that I'll be taking better care of my health,
mental and physical alike. Part of this is reducing my workload, reducing the
stress levels, and things I feel guilty about.

It's a strange feeling. A mix of sadness and relief. On the flip side, as
[Lars][liw] put it, I'm now part of the retired DD club, and that's one
illustrious club to be part of. First I joined the Debian Parents Club, now the
Retired Debian Developers Club. This is a good start of a new chapter.

 [liw]: https://liw.fi/

At some point though, I will be back. Debian is part of my life, and always will
be. One way or the other, there will be a way back. It may take years, or a
decade, but I'll put on that swirly hat again.
