---
title: "2020"
date: 2020-01-11 15:00
tags: [Life, Keyboard, News]
---

I set out to write a year-end retrospective, even ended up with almost a
thousand words written, but I got distracted, and never finished. Having sat
down to do just that now, I re-read it all, and decided it's best to throw it in
the bin. In many ways, 2019 was a terrible year. In some other ways, it was
incredible. When I first sat down, I started listing everything that happened,
good and bad - but in truth, such a detailed log is not something the great
public should read. Yes, yes, that "great" public is likely a handful of people
who stumble upon this blog. Doesn't matter. Those who need to know, do. Those
who don't, should not.

So instead of looking back, I'll be looking forward.

<!-- more -->

I will be looking forward to 2020, because we're in our own apartment now, and
while not everything's a rosy dream come true (oh, the stories I could tell!),
it's a colossal leap forward. It enabled - and continues to enable - us to do so
many things we weren't able to do before. We've made friends, plans, and had a
lot of fun. I also have a work room, with a lock, making it a million times
easier to work from home, and shut out any distractions when immersing myself in
keyboard-related work.

As it happens, I've been working for [Keyboardio][keyboardio] full-time for a
while, and it looks like that this might be sustainable for longer than
originally planned. Not complaining, mind you, this is a situation I very much
enjoy. Doubly so, because I'm also doing similar work for [Dygma][dygma] on the
side, and getting paid to do what I love doing is amazing, and I'm incredibly
privileged to be in this situation. Every day I wonder when I'll wake up to find
out this was just a dream.

 [keyboardio]: https://shop.keyboard.io/
 [dygma]: https://www.dygma.com/

Of course, sometimes I have to work on [Chrysalis][chrysalis] or
[Bazecor][bazecor], and then I start to question my life choices, because
JavaScript and front-end development in general is something I very much do
_not_ enjoy. But alas, that's also work that needs to be done. I guess it's the
price to pay for the privilege of being able to work from home, on free
software, which I use every single time I interact with the computer, in an area
I find great pleasure diving into.

 [chrysalis]: https://github.com/keyboardio/Chrysalis
 [bazecor]: https://github.com/Dygmalab/Bazecor

On another note, in 2020, I plan to continue adapting my work environment to be
more ergonomic, more comfortable, and more practical. I already have a [terrific
keyboard][model01], and amazing [trackball][orbit], an [adjustable standing
desk][ikea:desk]. The next thing is adjusting my monitors: they're currently on
the desk - I'd love to mount them on the wall instead, on adjustable arms.
That'd free up a lot of space on the desk, and would make it easier to have them
at the right height, distance, and angle. It would also allow me to reposition
more easily: whether I face the window, or away, for example. I'd also love to
upgrade at least one of my monitors to something that's easier on my eyes. At a
previous job, I loved the 30" 4k monitors, text were crisp, and the high
resolution was so much easier on my eyes. I've yet to find one which I like, and
can afford. There's a good chance I will need to upgrade my GPU to be able to
drive a 4k monitor, too. Plenty of things to figure out here, but this is a goal
I'm pursuing this year - because the rest of my work environment is already top
notch, and every single upgrade so far made me more productive. It pays off in
the long run.

 [model01]: https://shop.keyboard.io/collections/frontpage/products/model-01-keyboard
  [orbit]: https://www.kensington.com/p/products/ergonomics/ergonomic-input-devices/orbit-trackball-with-scroll-ring/
  [ikea:desk]: https://www.ikea.com/gb/en/p/bekant-desk-sit-stand-white-stained-oak-veneer-white-s19282085/

Another thing I want to do in 2020 is write more. Last year, I wasn't exactly
prolific, even though there were a lot of things I could've written about - but
when it would've made sense to write, I didn't have the resources to do so, and
doing it later wasn't a viable strategy. That's just guilt piling up, to the
point where I give up and just don't write. So the goal this year is to build
writing into my routine, so it does not get postponed. I do enjoy writing! But
there was always something more important to do. Writing felt like an
administrative burden - it shouldn't. I'm not sure how to tackle this yet.

With working on keyboard-related things full-time (_and_ part-time too), with
plans to improve my working conditions, and plans to write more, you can expect
more fun stories on these pages. The next one, as a matter of fact, will be the
story of two very confused bytes.
