---
title: "The Logical Next Step"
date: 2021-04-01 14:30
tags: [News]
---

It's been a while I posted here, even though there were a lot of things
happening around me. Alas, some of those led me onto a path that I am now ready
to talk about: it's been brewing for a good while now, and I'm excited to
announce it today!

I've spent the past two years working on [Kaleidoscope][kaleidoscope] and
[Chrysalis][chrysalis], and enjoyed every moment of it, keyboards, ergonomic
keyboards, are my passion. Today, I'm taking that a step further, and am joining
a major keyboard manufacturer to work on their input devices from now on. Not
only will I be working with an incredible team developing the next generation of
smart, cloud-connected input devices, but we will be bringing [my own][solarium]
[devices][ommatidia] to the market aswell!

 [kaleidoscope]:
 [chrysalis]:
 [solarium]: /blog/2019/03/18/Solarium/
 [ommatidia]: /blog/2017/12/03/Ommatidia/

<!-- more -->

I was originally approached by a different team from the company, due to having
a background in IoT and security, but the talks quickly turned to ergonomics and
input devices (my greatest fault is that I can't stop talking about things I'm
passionate about), and after a bit of back and forth, we ended up deciding that
we can combine all our experiences, all our knowledge, and build products where
all of them are put to good use. This is an incredible opportunity to put
everything I've learned so far while working on Kaleidoscope, Chrysalis, and the
many different projects of the past, towards the goal of building products that
will revolutionize what we think about input devices.

I can't wait to share the crazy new ideas we've come up with during the past
year of negotiation!
